
    
    
    This model is part of the following publication:

#  Cooperative gene regulation by microRNA pairs and their identification
using a computational workflow

Journal: Nucleic Acids Research  
Year: 2014  
Authors: Ulf Schmitz, Xin Lai, Felix Winter, Olaf Wolkenhauer, Julio Vera,
Shailendra K. Gupta  
doi:10.1093/nar/gku465

Abstract: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an integral part of gene regulation at the
post-transcriptional level. Recently, it has been shown that pairs of miRNAs
can repress the translation of a target mRNA in a cooperative manner, which
leads to an enhanced effectiveness and specificity in target repression.
However, it remains unclear which miRNA pairs can synergize and which genes
are target of cooperative miRNA regulation. In this paper, we present a
computational workflow for the prediction and analysis of cooperating miRNAs
and their mutual target genes, which we refer to as RNA triplexes. The
workflow integrates methods of miRNA target prediction; triplex structure
analysis; molecular dynamics simulations and mathematical modeling for a
reliable prediction of functional RNA triplexes and target repression
efficiency. In a case study we analyzed the human genome and identified
several thousand targets of cooperative gene regulation. Our results suggest
that miRNA cooperativity is a frequent mechanism for an enhanced target
repression by pairs of miRNAs facilitating distinctive and fine-tuned target
gene expression patterns. Human RNA triplexes predicted and characterized in
this study are organized in a web resource at www.sbi.uni-
rostock.de/triplexrna/.

The model is parameterized using the parameters for gene CCDC3 from
Supplementary Table S1. The two miRNAs which form the triplex together with
CCDC3 are miR-551b and miR-138.

